<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVII: A Letter from Davy</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">A Letter from Davy</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“It’s beginning to snow, girls,” said Phil, coming in one November evening, “and there are the loveliest little stars and crosses all over the garden walk. I never noticed before what exquisite things snowflakes really are. One has time to notice things like that in the simple life. Bless you all for permitting me to live it. It’s really delightful to feel worried because butter has gone up five cents a pound.”</p>
			<p>“Has it?” demanded Stella, who kept the household accounts.</p>
			<p>“It has⁠—and here’s your butter. I’m getting quite expert at marketing. It’s better fun than flirting,” concluded Phil gravely.</p>
			<p>“Everything is going up scandalously,” sighed Stella.</p>
			<p>“Never mind. Thank goodness air and salvation are still free,” said Aunt Jamesina.</p>
			<p>“And so is laughter,” added Anne. “There’s no tax on it yet and that is well, because you’re all going to laugh presently. I’m going to read you Davy’s letter. His spelling has improved immensely this past year, though he is not strong on apostrophes, and he certainly possesses the gift of writing an interesting letter. Listen and laugh, before we settle down to the evening’s study-grind.”</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Anne</span>,” ran Davy’s letter, “I take my pen to tell you that we are all pretty well and hope this will find you the same. It’s snowing some today and Marilla says the old woman in the sky is shaking her feather beds. Is the old woman in the sky God’s wife, Anne? I want to know.</p>
				<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lynde has been real sick but she is better now. She fell down the cellar stairs last week. When she fell she grabbed hold of the shelf with all the milk pails and stewpans on it, and it gave way and went down with her and made a splendid crash. Marilla thought it was an earthquake at first. One of the stewpans was all dinged up and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lynde straned her ribs. The doctor come and give her medicine to rub on her ribs but she didn’t understand him and took it all inside instead. The doctor said it was a wonder it dident kill her but it dident and it cured her ribs and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lynde says doctors dont know much anyhow. But we couldent fix up the stewpan. Marilla had to throw it out. Thanksgiving was last week. There was no school and we had a great dinner. I et mince pie and rost turkey and frut cake and donuts and cheese and jam and choklut cake. Marilla said Id die but I dident. Dora had earake after it, only it wasent in her ears it was in her stummick. I dident have earake anywhere.</p>
				<p>“Our new teacher is a man. He does things for jokes. Last week he made all us third-class boys write a composishun on what kind of a wife we’d like to have and the girls what kind of a husband. He laughed fit to kill when he read them. This was mine. I thought youd like to see it.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:essay">
					<p epub:type="title">“ ‘The kind of a wife Id like to Have.</p>
					<p>“ ‘She must have good manners and get my meals on time and do what I tell her and always be very polite to me. She must be fifteen years old. She must be good to the poor and keep her house tidy and be good tempered and go to church reglarly. She must be very handsome and have curly hair. If I get a wife that is just what I like Ill be an awful good husband to her. I think a woman ought to be awful good to her husband. Some poor women havent any husbands.</p>
					<p epub:type="conclusion">“ ‘<b>The End</b>.’</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“I was at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Isaac Wrights funeral at White Sands last week. The husband of the corpse felt real sorry. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lynde says <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Wrights grandfather stole a sheep but Marilla says we mustent speak ill of the dead. Why mustent we, Anne? I want to know. It’s pretty safe, ain’t it?</p>
				<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lynde was awful mad the other day because I asked her if she was alive in Noah’s time. I dident mean to hurt her feelings. I just wanted to know. Was she, Anne?</p>
				<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harrison wanted to get rid of his dog. So he hunged him once but he come to life and scooted for the barn while <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harrison was digging the grave, so he hunged him again and he stayed dead that time. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harrison has a new man working for him. He’s awful okward. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harrison says he is left handed in both his feet. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Barry’s hired man is lazy. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Barry says that but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Barry says he aint lazy exactly only he thinks it easier to pray for things than to work for them.</p>
				<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Harmon Andrews prize pig that she talked so much of died in a fit. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lynde says it was a judgment on her for pride. But I think it was hard on the pig. Milty Boulter has been sick. The doctor gave him medecine and it tasted horrid. I offered to take it for him for a quarter but the Boulters are so mean. Milty says he’d rather take it himself and save his money. I asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Boulter how a person would go about catching a man and she got awful mad and said she dident know, shed never chased men.</p>
				<p>“The <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">A.V.I.S.</abbr> is going to paint the hall again. They’re tired of having it blue.</p>
				<p>“The new minister was here to tea last night. He took three pieces of pie. If I did that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lynde would call me piggy. And he et fast and took big bites and Marilla is always telling me not to do that. Why can ministers do what boys can’t? I want to know.</p>
				<p>“I havent any more news. Here are six kisses. xxxxxx. Dora sends one. Heres hers. x.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Your loving friend</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">“David Keith”</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:postscript">“<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">P.S.</abbr> Anne, who was the devils father? I want to know.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
